# OLAP Cubes <!-- omit in toc -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [OLAP Cube Structure](#olap-cube-structure)
- [OLAP Cube Operations](#olap-cube-operations)
  - [Roll-up](#roll-up)
  - [Drill-down](#drill-down)
  - [Slice](#slice)
  - [Dice](#dice)

> Importante note: This document is a work in progress.  
> All information was generated by [Copilot](https://copilot.github.com/), just to check the topics that should be covered in the study guide.

## Introduction

OLAP stands for Online Analytical Processing. It is a technology that is used to perform complex calculations, analysis, and reporting on data. OLAP is a category of software technology that enables analysts, managers, and executives to gain insight into data through fast, consistent, interactive access to a wide variety of possible views of information that has been transformed from raw data to reflect the real dimensionality of the enterprise as understood by the user.

OLAP Cubes are a multidimensional representation of data. They are used to perform complex calculations, analysis, and reporting on data. OLAP Cubes are used to store data in a multidimensional format, which allows for faster and more efficient data analysis.

## OLAP Cube Structure

OLAP Cubes are made up of dimensions and measures. Dimensions are the categories by which data is analyzed, and measures are the data that is analyzed. Dimensions are the rows and columns of the cube, and measures are the values that are stored in the cube.

OLAP Cubes are typically stored in a star schema or snowflake schema. In a star schema, the fact table is at the center of the schema, and the dimension tables are connected to the fact table. In a snowflake schema, the dimension tables are normalized, and the fact table is connected to the dimension tables.

## OLAP Cube Operations

OLAP Cubes support a variety of operations, including roll-up, drill-down, slice, and dice. Roll-up is the process of summarizing data by moving up the hierarchy of a dimension. Drill-down is the process of breaking down data by moving down the hierarchy of a dimension. Slice is the process of selecting a subset of data from the cube. Dice is the process of selecting a subset of data from the cube by specifying multiple dimensions.

### Roll-up

Roll-up is the process of summarizing data by moving up the hierarchy of a dimension. For example, if you have a cube that contains data at the day, month, and year levels, you can roll up the data from the day level to the month level or from the month level to the year level.

### Drill-down

Drill-down is the process of breaking down data by moving down the hierarchy of a dimension. For example, if you have a cube that contains data at the year, month, and day levels, you can drill down the data from the year level to the month level or from the month level to the day level.

### Slice

Slice is the process of selecting a subset of data from the cube. For example, if you have a cube that contains data at the year, month, and day levels, you can slice the data to show only the data for a specific year, month, or day.

### Dice

Dice is the process of selecting a subset of data from the cube by specifying multiple dimensions. For example, if you have a cube that contains data at the year, month, and day levels, you can dice the data to show only the data for a specific year and month.

